# Image-based segmentation and localization of surgical instruments using deep neural networks
Here you can find my [bachelorthesis](https://github.com/Amyy/bachelor_thesis/blob/main/thesis.pdf) and the corresponding LaTeX sourcecode.

### Abstract
Segmentation and localization of surgical instruments in endoscopic videos during minimally invasive surgery is a fundamental requirement for supporting the surgeon during this sophisticated surgical technique. Here, a CNN-based deep learning method is used to get the positional information of the instrument directly out of the video frames without further modifications. In this work, the segmentation network TernausNet-11 is extended to a network that also solves the localization task. The instrument segmentation is addressed
as a binary problem, where every pixel of the input image is labeled as instrument or background. The instrument location is obtained by the prediction of heatmaps where the center point of the instrument is located. That makes it possible for the network to use the information learned for the segmentation task to improve the localization results, as the weights of the network are shared for both tasks. All proposed methods are evaluated on the robotic dataset of MICCAI 2015 Endoscopic Vision subchallenge according to the challenge guidelines. The results of the experiments show that the proposed method is able to solve the segmentation task on the same level as state-of-the-art results. For the localization task, the models tested particularly on the test datasets achieve lower results than current state-of-the-art methods. The models trained in leave-one-surgery-out fashion outperform current state-of-the-art methods. 
